- You know the word scapegoat?
(laughs)
(music)
There's a reason we get
blamed for everything.
(laughs)
(music)
Goats are living.
They are a living
bundle of energy.
- They are so perfectly
designed to eat the brush
and thorny stuff
because they just go...
- They butt heads and
play king on the mountain
- There's a lot of byproducts
and things that the goats
are doing besides just eating
vegetation or weed control.
- [Lani] This is a fun,
joyful, alive energy
that is doing the
work on the land.
- A lot of people will
come out here and just sit
and watch the goats for hours.
- So it's bringing everything
to life and there's a joy
that comes with it
but you can't get that
with a mowing machine.
You can't get it with chemicals.
- So the goats are
doing 15 things at once.
- [Narrator] Goats Eat Weeds
on this Farm to Fork Wyoming.
- [Announcer] Production
on Farm to Fork Wyoming
is made possible with
the generous support
of viewers like you.
Thank you.
(rooster crows)
- A lot of these weeds are here
because this land was stressed.
When this, I'm guessing this
housing development came in
and they, you know,
they kind of rescaped
and restructured this land
and so when it was disturbed,
you know, mother nature's
band aid, it's annuals
and it's biannuals and
the succession of plants.
- Our business is goat weed
grazing and our purpose
is to improve the soil.
So, that way, you can
actually control weeds.
- You know, so we're after just
improving the soil quality.
A lot of people get hung
up on what's above ground,
as the symptoms, and then they
want a sprayer or something
to kill what's above ground
and we're focused on promoting
life in the soil to allow the
native desired plants to grow.
- [Narrator] Man has
waged war on weeds since
the beginning of agriculture.
Some weeds are put on
the noxious weed list,
outlawed and targeted
with chemical sprays.
- The description of
what a noxious weed is,
is it's a non native,
very aggressive plant.
- [Narrator] Leafy spurge,
Russian knapweed and kochia
have made countless
acres unpalatable
to cattle, horses and wildlife.
- Unfortunately,
people have sprayed
so many herbicides
that kochia's resistant
to about every
chemical known to man.
- [Narrator] For these
contract goat herders,
the trick is not to win
the noxious weed battle
with herbicides, but to
participate in what nature
is trying to accomplish.
- [Greg] You have good soil,
you're gunna have good grass.
It's pretty much
impossible not to.
- [Narrator] Recognizing the
importance of the animal,
plant, soil connection,
these goat herders work
to convert weeds into something
that feeds the soil life.
- The goats just happen
to eat the weeds,
but, you know, they manage
the cows, the sheep, the deer,
whatever you happen to be on
there, I mean, that's required
to have a good, healthy
range, land and soil
is to actually graze it.
- [Narrator] So they
bring in goats to eat
the invasive plant the cattle,
horses and wildlife will not.
- So these are Cashmere goats.
They, evolution wise,
come from the top
of the Himalaya mountains
but a lot of weeds
come from Eurasia so, you
know, they have a connection
that cattle and
horses don't have.
These have the enzymes and
bacteria that they can utilize
all these insane plants that
cattle and horses can't.
- [Narrator] So the
goal is to augment
nature's restoration process.
- When you have a
disturbance to any ground
and, it could be a natural
disturbance, like right now
the floods, hurricane,
drought, fire, that causes
the ground to be bare, mother
nature is gunna rush in
and protect that.
She sees that there's a
wound, like I get a scab.
That's to protect my
surface and keep my boundary
of my skin intact and,
so, mother nature does
the same thing
and who does that?
Our annual weeds.
That's their job so they rush in
so you have cheatgrass
here, kochia, sunflowers,
lamb's quarters, tumble
weeds, Russian thistle,
halogeton, all of
those annual weeds.
That is their job in plant
succession is to rush in
and cover that wound
and protect the surface
and hold your water in.
Next, if you don't do
anything, you're gunna see
biannual plants,
weeds, which would be
all of the thistles
except Canada thistle.
Common mullein,
houndstongue, dyer's woad.
Takes two years for
it to make a seed
and get that root going down
so it's starting to build
soil structure and
bring other things up.
So that's the biannual.
You have bare ground,
annual, biannual,
then you start to
see perennials.
Often you'll see the
perennial weeds first.
Leafy spurge, Russian
knapweed, bindweed,
dalmation toadflax, all of
those that are a big problem.
Canada thistle,
you'll see those.
And then you'll see grass
and then, and this is like,
doing nothing, so, in a dry
environment like Wyoming,
this could be 400 years
for this to progress
but it's the natural progression
and then you see brush
and then you see trees.
- [Narrator] It is the plant
world's way of bringing
trace minerals up to the
surface where the biology
in the soil needs it.
- Some of these other noxious
weeds we have in the area,
one of the reasons they can
survive so well is they have
a tremendous root
system and they can go
so much further down
than those normal grasses
and normal vegetation
does that they can reach
way down there and
so they'll pull up
the nutrients that the
other grasses can't get to.
- So, all of these
plant, you know,
they have different purposes
and different skills.
The Astragalus species,
which are vetches,
are the only plant that can
bring selenium up from the soil.
The only plant.
So they all do their
thing and all the roots
go to different depths.
Russian knapweed and the
knapweeds pull up a lot of zinc.
- So, by either trampling
them on the ground
or on the surface, and
then trampling them
and putting that nutrients
back into the topsoil,
or by an animal eating
that vegetation, you know,
as the whole nutrient
cycle starts over
with nutrients that nobody
else is able to get to.
- Goats like Russian knapweed
so you have two choices
if you have a herd
of cattle or horses
and you have a whole
bunch of Russian knapweed.
One is you kill it all or go
get something that eats it...
(laughs)
and use it.
It's a natural resource,
why not use it?
All I do is recycle it.
- Come on nanny,
nanny, nanny, nannies!
- [Narrator] Greg and
Carolina are actually raising
meat goats on leafy
spurge, which is one of
the worst weed
problems rancher's face
in the Devil's Tower area.
- If there's spurge,
they'll eat the spurge
before the thistle.
Totally addicted to it and
it doesn't take them long.
You don't have to teach
them to eat leafy spurge.
As soon as they take a
bite, it just sends a signal
to their brain, like,
okay, this is what we want.
- [Narrator] Sending
yearly goats to market
is how they're able to make
a profit as contract grazers.
- [Greg] Yeah, they
gotta do well, I mean,
majority of our income
comes from selling the meat.
You know, we get very
little for grazing contract.
- [Narrator] At 20% protein,
spurge is a high quality forage.
- [Greg] They gain great on it.
- [Carolina] Oh,
yeah, they gain.
- [Greg] Yeah!
- [Carolina] But
it's a high protein.
- They do well on spurge.
- 20% protein or something.
- [Narrator] And these animals
are incredibly adaptable.
- [Carolina] We like a Spanish
goat with lots of cashmere
for the winter cause we don't
have a barn or anything.
This is a, you know, we're
totally a range outfit.
No farm or barn for the goats
to go into in the winter.
We supplement with hay but
they still graze, you know,
and they live off brush
and pine trees and junipers
and we do all that
kind of clean up
which they're really
good at and they love it.
- [Greg] Just cut down a
tree, let them clean it up
and then haul it out.
- As soon as they hear
a chainsaw they just...
- Yeah, you know.
- They just come
running like "ahhh!"
- Depending on how
much snow we have.
- Forget the alfalfa
hay, pine trees!
- Yeah, yeah we can call
'em with the chainsaw.
It's pretty bad.
- [Narrator] While Devil's
Tower Goats relies on
ranch contracts to raise
their goats for market,
Goat Green LLC has developed
the same Spanish goat breed
to work everything from
open range to city lots.
- We're out in production
agriculture, you know?
We're a service
contracted business.
We're not worried
about putting weight
on these animals for
slaughter, you know?
We want ours skinny and hungry
and a little bit wild, you know?
We don't want tame,
very heavy, fat goats.
Very difficult for
our border collie
to herd a tame goat, you know?
They just stand
there and look at 'em
and, you know, I
want ours to be wild
and when I bring the
border collie in here
to herd 'em, they understand
that they need to go.
- This herd right now, these
babies are six months old
and they've been on a
truck maybe twelve times,
they've worked in four states
and they've been on 15 jobs.
They're not even six months
old, so, this is their life.
Now, some of the older ones in
here have maybe in on a truck
500 times and
worked in 15 states
and eaten many, many,
many different plants,
so, one of the
value of this herd
because I don't kill 'em for
slaughter, is their knowledge
and their training and their
ability to eat everything.
For instance, poison hemlock,
even though these babies
have never been on poison
hemlock, the mothers have
and the gut system can
process these poisonous plants
that these goats have eaten
over my last 22 years.
The herd has a memory,
the gut has a memory
and the behavior has a memory.
Now, the mama goats here
were right here last year.
The goats in Cheyenne,
we've been there,
they have a memory and
they know that town.
- We've had the city
of Cheyenne contract
off and on for about 20 years.
So, there's two creeks
that run through town.
One is Crow Creek,
one is Dry Creek.
We have very narrow
sets here in Cheyenne
because of the creek,
so, it's kind of...
Can be a bit dangerous
when something spooks them
or scares them like
that motorcycle there
or a helicopter because
there's an air force base
here in Cheyenne, so, if
something spooks them,
they have nowhere to run.
It's so narrow.
So, that's an issue that we
deal with here in Cheyenne.
Right along the street, the
highways, the bike paths...
- Goats know where the water
is, they know the plants,
they know the traffic,
they know the people,
they know everything.
They know the predators.
- Also the people
along the bike path
and loose dogs are
our biggest issues.
- So once the goats are
trained, they are very,
very valuable to be alive
and have that memory.
- [Narrator] And they perform
many functions at one time.
- They're doin' weed control,
fire fuel mitigation,
flood mitigation,
bank stabilization.
Goats will come down to
get a drink and shave off
some of those steep banks
that you see over here
and get some of the
seeding and vegetation
along those banks so those
banks don't erode any further
and create more erosion
and steeper banks.
And so we focus along the
creeks where they can't get
machinery down into, near
the banks and then, you know,
they can't spray herbicides
or pesticides near the water.
- This isn't necessarily a
fire fuel mitigation job.
We just came from one
of those, and so you...
You know, everything is time
management with the goats.
They're just a grazing
tool in order to,
you know, help the land,
whatever you're trying to do.
So, the previous contract
with the fire fuel mitigation,
you know, we're reducing
all that vegetation below,
you know, they'll jump up
and eat so it's about
eight feet and below.
So we'll reduce all
that vegetation down
there which is how
the fire travels and then
we recycle all the nutrients
above ground, we're
recycling into the ground,
which is 100% organic matter.
It's, you know,
there's no viable seed
that goes through
a goat's system.
It's like, .001% chance and
it's because of their narrow,
triangular mouths and they
chew, like, in a lateral
jaw movement, sickle,
kind of like a sickle
and that destroys and crushes
those seeds and so then
when it through in their
rumen, it's when it passes
through their system, you're
left with a small pellet
that is completely, you
know, ground up, chewed up
and there's no
viable seed in there.
And we try to time it so
that we graze those seeds
and, you know, all of the
flowers above ground of,
on the stem and that
way it, you know,
depletes that plant and
they can't reproduce.
- [Narrator] And for ranchers
running cattle, horses
and even sheep, goats
fill a very special niche.
- The goats eat very,
very little grasses
and it's also, sort of like
an instant result, right?
You see it, like, oh,
wow, you were here?
There's still all that feed
but the spurge is gone.
So, a lot of ranchers
have realized, well,
this might be better
than spraying.
We've pretty much tried to
overgraze the leafy spurge
that goats come through,
they aerate the soil,
they fertilize it.
After we come through
cleaning up the spurge,
the other grasses have
a chance to compete
and maybe out
compete the spurge.
The challenge with goats
is that you can't just
turn them out because, you know,
if a fence doesn't hold
water, it doesn't hold a goat.
So you have to stay with them
and you get the best
results, we find.
I mean, you can leave
them in the electric fence
and move the fence, but, I
think the goats are better
for the landscape and for...
And it's better
for them to move.
They love to walk.
They cover miles.
They love to climb, they go
to places up in the rim rock
where there is spurge
where nobody else would go.
- [Narrator] Where fence
grazing is impractical
on a large ranch, it's
essential in the city limits.
- Yeah, fencing, it's,
it's funny, you know,
herding the goats is
actually easy, you know?
Or a lot easier than this.
Fencing the goats is
difficult but you can't get
such targeted grazing,
usually, without fencing
and also, you know, 90%
of what the fence is for
is to keep predators
and people out,
rather than the goats in.
- [Narrator] And predators
are always an issue.
- Mountain lions.
- Well, yeah, we have most
problems with mountain lions.
- But the coyotes...
- The coyotes, bob cats,
foxes when the kids are young
and, of course, the birds.
We do have some golden eagles
and bald eagles in the area.
Especially more in the spring.
- [Narrator] The predator
challenge is a little different
in the city.
- See, so this is one of
the risk mitigation here
is kids riding by yellin',
throwing firecrackers
and stuff in at the goats
and that'll spook them out,
push over the fence and
they run out into the road
and that's, this is the problem
working in the city right there
and off leash dogs is
the biggest problem.
- [Narrator] Herding
dogs can be a liability
in a city setting, but
they're indispensable
out on the ranch.
- So we use two different dogs.
We have the herding
dog that helps us herd
and we have the guardian
dogs and they don't herd
but they protect the herd
and that's mostly instinctive.
It's pretty amazing that
these dogs are with the herd
24/7 and really protect
them and not kill them.
So, when they see a
vulture or anything,
they know the
distinction and they know
that that's a threat,
while if a duck flies over,
they don't even look up
and same with snakes.
I mean, and they see a snake,
they know it's a threat
and, of course, you
know, mountain lions,
and everything else, coyotes.
They know it's a threat and
they're very, very brave.
They go out and they announce
the presence with the barking
which helps keep the predators
at bay most of the time.
- [Narrator] Under
some circumstances
Donny also uses a guardian dog.
- And then occasionally,
we'll have an akbash...
Is what we run as
a herd protector.
- [Narrator] But neither
operation succeeds
without it's herd dogs.
- The weeds are smarter
than the good plants,
if you're gunna look
at it that judgmentally
and the only thing smarter
than a weed is a goat
but the only thing smarter
than a goat is a border collie.
(laughs)
- We use purebred border
collies and they're the key
to the whole operation,
is a good dog.
You have to have a good dog
to run a business like this.
Goats are herd animals,
so instinctively
they stick together.
Cattle, sheep, they'll
kind of stray out,
go off on their own.
I can use one dog per
thousand head of goats.
You know, me, one well
trained, well trained dog
and, you know, you say a
thousand, fifteen hundred head,
that's enough to run them.
You have a very difficult
time doing that with cattle.
I love working with the
dogs and the border collies.
They're a magnificent animal
that are so intelligent.
It's a pleasure to work
with them everyday.
- But that's why
I have all this...
You know, I have all
these intelligent goats
and then the dogs to that
and, really, my only job
is to feed the dogs
and open the door,
camper door, so that
they can go to work.
(laughs)
Sign the contracts.
- [Narrator] So this
orchestration of animals
is the herders way
to work with nature.
- So, it's a different paradigm.
Chasing symptoms would have
you go out trying to kill
this thistle and that
kochia and that every year.
Well, look what happens.
You go back to bare ground.
Well, now succession has
to start all over again.
When you use chemical
herbicide, you're coming in
to try and kill something
and the first thing you do
is kill the fungi in the soil
and to have a healthy grassland,
you must have fungi
bacteria ratio
of one to one in the soil.
When you spray,
you kill the fungi.
It goes heavy load bacteria,
which is weed problem.
Look at the kochia here,
that's overload of the bacteria
in the soil and
people can't see that.
- This approach where
you say well, it's here,
let's find a balance
and make sure that all,
everything gets a
chance to be there.
- [Narrator] Today, most land
managers integrate mowing
and herbicides for weed
control but grazing goats
is becoming more
and more common.
- We've been working
towards restoring lands
for 20 years now and
in an urban setting
with the city of Fort
Collins, what we've seen
is that it's difficult
in smaller landscapes
to really replicate the
impacts and the grazing
and the ecological processes
that historically happened
and so while we approach
restoration with reseeding
and mowing and all the
real classical integrated
pest management type
approaches, the one that's hard
to really replicate
is the grazing.
- Also, you know, irrigating
up above the banks.
They're split hoofed,
light weight animals,
so they till the soil
as opposed to compact it
and that allows a lot of
the moisture and nutrients
and fertilization, you know,
for these native species
and plants to grow.
- [Narrator] There is
no machine or chemical
that can replicate what
animals do so elegantly.
- If we're feeding the
microbes underground,
we're building that
fungi bacteria ratio
and bringing it into balance.
All the microbes are being fed.
This is getting broken down
and turned back to carbon
and nitrogen and sulfer
and put back down.
See, when it's
standing up like this,
this does the soil no good.
Has to be soil contact
and trampled in.
So the hoof action of the
goats is a very big deal.
So they recycle
everything right in place.
- In this dry climate,
unless there's something
breaking down all
that plant material,
it is just deposited on
the surface and over time,
it doesn't break down
quickly and so we don't get
the sun exposure on the
soil and so that limits
for production and the
diversity of grass production
that we'd like to see.
- That's what I do with these
goats, is, hurry up and eat
all of these weeds,
recycle them in the gut,
and then put 'em right
back on the ground
as pure organic fertilizer
and there's some right there
and that is a perfect,
organic bunch of nutrients,
so, if you could, with your
perfectly calibrated eyes,
see that recycled whatever
they're eating behind us,
you would see carbon,
nitrogen, sulfur,
boron, magnesium, calcium.
You would see those nutrients.
So those are nutrients
put right back in.
- And, so, we can, in some
areas, bring cattle in
as we do at Soapstone
and Bobcat Ridge
but in these real
small, urban areas,
we're much more limited
in the types of animals
that we could use to graze
and, it's great to have someone
like Lani that we can,
that we can reach out to
and have her come in
and provide the service.
- [Narrator] The eventual
goal is to bring about
a self sustaining plant system.
- And every land owner's
different in what they want.
- [Narrator] In
restoration projects,
like the Cattail Course Natural
Area here in For Collins,
seeding grassland companion
plants might be a benefit.
- We don't have any
legumes in here.
Legumes are broad leaves
that fix nitrogen in the soil
and grasses take a lot of
nitrogen, so, let's get
some broad leaved plants in
here who are fixing the nitrogen
and then we feed the soil such
that the microbes are working
underneath to help
them fix more nitrogen
and we start building
a living system
with all these plants who
are all doing their jobs.
I always call the biannual
thistles the prep chefs.
They're the prep chefs.
Why would you kill
the pref chef?
(laughs)
He scrubs the vegetables
and cuts them and goes home.
The bare ground where you
have that disturbance,
it must heal, like your scab.
It must heal and
have the nutrition
before it can move forward.
You can't just
plant grass there.
- [Narrator] Though goats
might improve conditions
for grass production,
they can still be
a tough sell in cattle country.
- They definitely have
a stigma, it seems.
Especially with cattle ranchers
and we're cattle ranchers
by background so when we
were kids and everything,
everyone says, you know,
"oh, you know, we don't,
there's no goats
allowed on the property"
or whatever and the stigma
usually comes from, you
know, goats locked up
in a yard that jump
on cars and eat paint
and things like that, you know?
So, yeah, they have that
stigma with the goats
but that's just like anything.
That's like a border collie
that's not given it's purpose
or allowed to do what
it's intended to do.
Children are the
same way, you know?
It's, it's, you channel
their energy and what they do
to some sort of positive
action and then they're okay.
- You, you're the head nanny.
You tell them what
a goat's like.
- Oh, goats, they are curious.
They're very social.
You, you can train
them for anything.
They just cover a lot of ground.
- They will cover a
lot more ground than...
- Than sheep or cows
- Especially the cows.
I used to be able to
set down a bunch of cows
or bulls, put them in
an area and go back,
check on 'em five days
and know exactly in
the area they'd be in.
If you did that with goats,
you're liable to gat a call
from the Canadian Mounties.
- It's what we do as a company,
is all we do is manage
these goats and let them do
what they need to do and
what they do naturally
and we'll just manage them.
- [Narrator] It's a
matter of stewardship.
- It's undoing the wrongs
that have been done
in the last 100 to 500 years
of how this land has been used.
Over grazing by
cattle and horses,
you get all these problems
because horses and
cattle don't eat them
and it's been overgrazed
and now cut up by ranchets
and subdividing and
roads and fence lines.
Permanent fence lines are
so terrible of destroying
the flow of energy on the land
and the flow of the livestock,
the flow of the wildlife,
the flow of everything.
It disrupts that, so, to try
to counterbalance the wrongs
I want to bring the
exact opposite back.
So, I bring a big herd of goats.
Cattle and horses are grazers
and they eat all grass.
Goats are browsers and
grass is their last choice.
- The goats eat one thing,
the cows eat the other thing
and that way you're
really taking advantage
of what you have on your ranch.
You're increasing
your, your livestock.
your profitability,
your carrying capacity
and hopefully your
bottom dollar, you know?
You just have more way to
sell, more meat to sell.
That's kind of where we're at.
Some people just, it's
not for them, you know?
Goats are just a tool
in the toolbox, right?
And there's many different
ways of managing land.
This is just one of them.
- So what I want to build
with this living machine
I have here, and, by the
way, they're self propelled,
is, bringing all these
things into balance
and everything you can't see.
You can't see joy,
really, but you can,
when these animals are
playing and they're...
You can tell they have
purpose and these dogs.
It's joyful and it's, it's
fun and people like to see it.
(music)
So, the management should be
the highest intrinsic value
of the land and then
the byproduct would be
how rich this is,
how beautiful it is.
The aesthetic value.
How much life it supports.
How much water it can hold.
The land outta function like
a giant sponge to hold water.
That means the soil is
full of organic matter
and then can hold all the
water available to the plants.
So, that's what we
should be managing for.
- I mean, this didn't
come to be by not grazing.
You know, the bison, the
deer and the elk all started
this whole trend of eating it.
The whole cycle's
starting again, creating
a good range land
so, by not eating it, it's
probably actually doing
more harm than
grazing it by far.